Mirror from [https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors)

# Dotted Version Vector Sets
## Managing Values with Causality

**TL;DR** Dotted Version Vector Sets are similar to Version Vectors (Vector
Clocks for some), but prevent false conflicts that can occur with Version
Vectors. It also has a more complete API and is better suited to distributed
databases with a get/put interface (has shown below).

### Contents

- [Intro](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#intro)
- [Why not Version Vectors (Vector Clocks)?](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#why-not-version-vectors-vector-clocks)
- [The Solution: Dotted Version Vector Sets](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#the-solution-dotted-version-vectors-sets)
- [Real World with Riak](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#real-world-with-riak)
- [How to Use](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#how-to-use)
- [Variations:](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#dvvsets-variations)
    * [Removing old entries](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#removing-old-entries)
    * [Consecutive and concurrent writes](https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors#consecutive-and-concurrent-writes)

##### Brief note on notation

{ ... } is a *set* (no order or duplicates)

[ ... ] is a *list* (like an array, has order)

( ... ) is a *n-tuple* (pair, triples, etc.)


## Intro

We are presenting the **compact** version of the original [Dotted Version
Vectors][paper dvv](DVV), which we call **Dotted Version Vector Set (DVVSet)**.
Like its predecessor, DVVSet still accurately describes causality between
related or conflicting values (values that reflect concurrent updates and that
must be all kept until a future reconciliation supersedes them), but now with a
smaller representation, very similar to Version Vectors in size.

Lets assume the scenario of a Distributed Key-Value Store (Ex: Riak,
Cassandra, etc), where we have clients, servers and we can write ( *PUT* ) and
read ( *GET* ) values. We also want to track the causality information of
these values, so that causally descendant values replace older values and
causally concurrent values are all kept (for further reconciliation).

We can use DVVSet to keep the values and their causal history together, with
support for multiple conflicting values (**siblings**). One DVVSet has 1 value
(a single sibling) if there are no conflicts. Otherwise, it stores all siblings
and their relevant causal information in a single DVVSet. Thus, this data
structure encapsulates the *tracking*, *maintaining* and *reasoning* about the
values' causality.


## Why not Version Vectors (Vector Clocks)?

First, [Version Vectors are not Vector Clocks][blog VV are not VC]; both have
similar structure but different semantics. In our context, the relevant
mechanism is *Version Vectors (VV)*.

Every key/value has an associated VV and sometimes conflicts arise, because
values for the same key can reflect concurrent updates and thus have conflicting
VVs (there isn't a single VV that dominates all others). Considering that we
want to keep all conflicting values until something (a conflict resolution
algorithm) or someone (the user) decides how to reconcile, the question is:
**How do we represent conflicts in the server?**

### Client IDs vs Server IDs

There are two different approaches when using VV or similar causality tracking
mechanisms: use **Server IDs (SI)** or use **Client IDs (CI)**.

VV need identifiers to track the *entities* responsible for the events. We can
either make the servers *responsible* for events to a value (SI), or we can make
clients responsible (CI).

A **false conflict** occurs when a set of values contains values that *should*
be discard, if the causality were correctly preserved, as they are related in a
causal evolution chain and do not contain concurrent updates.  VVs with CI don't
have false conflicts like VVs with SI. However, they don't scale well. On the
other hand, VV with SI scale, but don't have a good support for the
identification of conflicting values.


### Client-Server Example

Lets illustrate the different VV approaches to track events in a simple
client/server interaction.


#### Client IDs

Using VV with CI, you don't have any problem representing conflicts in the
server, because each write is associated with the client that did it (one has as
many IDs as the potential sources of concurrent writes). We can see that *v3*
correctly superseded *v1*, thus no false conflict occurred.

![VV Client IDs #1][VV 1]

**Problem**: If 1000 different clients write to a key/value, its VV will have
1000 `(client_id, counter)` entries. We could prune older entries when a limit
is reached, to bound growth and improve scalability, but it would introduce
false conflict problems (showing causally related values as concurrent).
Additionally, the same client could write to different servers and, if R/W
quorum setup do not ensure read-your-writes session guaranties, each could end
up with the same VV, although depicting different writes. We could combine the
identifier to be a pair `client_id/server_id`, but that would actually worsen
the VV growth problem even more.


#### Server IDs #1 - Keep VV Separated

Using SI, you could keep both VVs when conflicts occur, but you would consume
more space. More importantly, VV are not sufficient to represent conflicts
created by two "concurrent writes".

![VV Server IDs #1][VV 2]

**Problem**: As we can see, there is no way for VV-SI to represent two
conflicting values, since we can only increment the VV with the server id: if we
use (A,1) for both, we are saying that they are causally equal, which is not
true; using (A,2) implies that *v2* is causally newer than *v1*, which is also
not true. If we assume (A,1) for both values *v1* and *v2*, we then have an
additional problem where the behavior is undefined or incorrect: in the 3rd
write, we receive a value that read *v1* ~ (A,1), so it should conflict with
*v2* and overwrite *v1*; however, when writing *v2*, we did not increment its VV
to (A,2), thus the new write *v3* wins over (A,1) and overwrites both *v1* and
*v2*.

A possible solution could be to use some **metadata** to tell us where the
values came from and how to deal with conflicting values, but it would not be
straightforward and would be full of corner cases and prone to bugs. We should
not put the burden on the developer to implement proper causal behavior for
conflicting values on top of VV.


#### Server IDs #2 - Merge VV

Another solution is to keep both values and merge their VV into one, which saves
space when compared to the previous approach. If a new write conflicts with an
existing VV, then merge both VV and increment it normally using the server id.
Both values are now related to this new merged VV.

![VV Server IDs #2][VV 3]

**Problem**: We lose the information that *v1* was associated with (A,1) and
not (A,2). In the third write we can see how this approach could lead to **false
conflicts**. *v3* is being written with (A,1), therefore we know that it should
win over *v1* and conflict with *v2*, but since we lost information about the
causal past of *v1*, the server has no other option but to keep all three values
and merge the VV again. Now the problem is even worse, since we are saying that
all three values are related to (A,3). It's easy to see that this could lead to
undesired behavior and an explosion of false conflicts.



## The Solution: Dotted Version Vectors (Sets)

The problems described above are the reasons that made us develop the original
*Dotted Version Vectors (DVV)* in the first place. It uses *Server Ids* but
without the problems stated above, and allowing precise causality tracking. Lets
give a brief explanation about DVV.

### The Origin: Dotted Version Vectors (DVV)

A VV is a set of pairs `(id, counter)`. The value of `counter` means that we
know all events done by `id` until `counter`. Thus, if `counter` is 3, we know
about events #1, #2 and #3, done by that `id`.

The novelty of DVV is to provide the context where the last event happened. To
do that, we separate the last event from the VV itself. This last event is what
we call the **Dot** (hence *Dotted* Version Vectors). It's a pair `(id,
counter)` and only represents the event of that exact counter and not previous
events; the `(A, 3)` Dot only represents the event 3 by A, and nothing else
(like event 1 and 2 by A). Thus, this Dot allows the representation of non-
contiguous set of events, for each sibling. Using this, we can solve our
previous problem:

![Dotted Version Vectors][DVV]

On the first write, since *v1* had no causal context, the VV in the DVV is also
empty. The Dot captures the last event, which in this case, is `(A,1)`. When
*v2* is written, it also doesn't have causal history, so the DVV also has a
empty VV, but with the Dot `(A,2)`, since its the second event recorded by A for
this key. Both values coexist without confusion and preserve their context.
Finally, when *v3* arrives with the context `(A,1)`, we know that it already
read *v1*, thus it can be safely discarded. We keep *v2* because it has events
(updates) that *v3* does not know. The DVV for *v3* is the VV given by the
client, and the Dot is the next available event by A : `(A,3)`.

We have solved this problem by allowing values to have non-contiguous set of
causal events (however, all DVVs combined should have a set of contiguous
events).

For more information about **VV/SI** vs **VV/CI** vs **DVV** see this article:
[Dotted Version Vectors: Efficient Causality Tracking for Distributed Key-Value
Stores][paper dvv]).


### The Optimization: Dotted Version Vector Sets (DVVSet)

Dotted Version Vector Sets (DVVSet) solves the exact same problems as DVV, but
is much more concise and simple. Instead of having a DVV of each sibling, lets
combine all the causal information in the DVVs into a single VV, while retaining
the Dots information. 

We really only want two different things from a causality mechanism: (1) assign
new causal events to new siblings, and (2) remove outdated siblings. To have (1)
we only need one causal event per sibling (the Dot), and for (2) we only need to
know which causal events we already know (a global VV), since it doesn't matter
which sibling obsoletes another one, the end result is the same; thus, we can
lose the information of the specific causal context of each sibling and store
only the aggregate of that information.

Now, instead of:

`v2 ~ ([],(A,2))`
`v3 ~ ([(A,1)],(A,3))`
![Dot 1][Dot 1]

like the last result in our previous example, we have:

`v2 ~ (A,2)`
`v3 ~ (A,3)`
`global ~ (A,1)`
![Dot 2][Dot 2]

So, we have 2 Dots and a global VV. Taking it a step further, we can use
implicit value placement to represent the Dots like so:

`(A,1,[v2,v3])`
![Dot 3][Dot 3]

meaning that `(A,1)` is the global VV and `[v2,v3]` are the Dots. They are
constructed using the id of the triplet they're in, and each counter is
obtained by their position in the list. *v2* is the first
element, so we add 1 to the global VV and have the Dot `(A,2)`. *v3* is second
element, so we add 2 to the global VV and have the Dot `(A,3)`.

Well, actually, for implementation purposes, it is more practical to have the
VV as the whole set of events and the list of values reversed. Our example
becomes:

`(A,3,[v3,v2])`
![Dot 4][Dot 4]

where each Dot is the zero-based index position in the list, minus the counter
of the VV. Thus, `v3 ~ (A,3-0)` and `v2 ~ (A,3-1)`, the same as before.

Recapping, a DVVSet is a set of triplets **(ID, Counter, Values)**: *ID* is a
unique server identifier; *Counter* is a regular monotonically increasing
counter, starting at 1 for the first event; *Values* is an ordered list of
values, where new values are added to the head.  Considering the triplet `(I, C,
V)`, the Dot for each value in V at position `i` is `(I, C-i)` (V is zero-based
index).

Now, let's see how DVVSet would manage in our previous example:

![Dotted Version Vector Set][DVVSet 1]

We have a compact representation like the approach based on VV with SI #2, while
preserving sufficient per value causality information to infer that *v1* could
be discard, since it can detect that the 3rd write already knows the causal
information associated with *v1*, and thus can replace it.

#### The Anonymous List (AL)

We actually simplified the DVVSet structure a bit for explanation purposes. The
complete DVVSet is a list of triplets **(ID, Counter, Values)** like before,
with an additional set of values. We call this the **Anonymous List (AL)**,
because it stores values that are not associated any Dot, but is instead related
to the global VV. Thus, the only way to supersede values in the AL, is to
dominate the global VV.

##### From VV to DVVSet

If you pay attention, having values in the AL is exactly like having a normal
VV. This makes the conversion from a DB with VV to DVVSets painless, since we
can gradually and deterministically transform them with every new write,
avoiding the need have an offline rewrite of every key.

As an example, the VV `[(A,2), (B,3)]` associated with siblings `{v4,v6}` can be
represented by this  DVVSet `([(A,2,[]), (B,3,[])], {v4,v6})`.

##### Reconcile

Sometimes need the flexibility of saying that a value does not have a Dot, like
when we simplify siblings into a single value. For example, applying a
deterministic conflict resolution algorithm, like the reconciliations captured
in [Conflict Free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs)][paper crdt].

`reconcile` is a function that receives a DVVSet and another function. The
latter takes a list of values and returns a new value (the *winner*). The result
can be a completely new value (one that was not created directly by a client
event), thus we don't advance the causal history, and instead store it in the
AL. We also don't store the winner in a preexistent Dot, since writes that read
the pre-`reconcile`d DVVSet would supersede the new value.

Also, the function that returns the new value should be **deterministic**! If
not, we can have incoherent DVVSets. For example, applying `reconcile` with a
non-deterministic function to two replicas could yield two different values with
the same causal history. This is dangerous and is a similar situation to VV with
SI #1, where we keep equal VVs for different values. 

Here is an (Erlang) example using `reconcile`:

```Erlang
    F = fun (L) -> lists:sum(L) end,
    DVVSet = {[{a,4,[5,2]}, {b,1,[]}], [10,1]},
    Res = dvvset:reconcile(F, DVVSet),
    {[{a,4,[]}, {b,1,[]}], [18]} = Res.
```

We pass a function to `reconcile` that adds all values. The returning DVVSet has
the same causal information, but now has only one value (18), which was not
present in the previous DVVSet.

##### Last Write Wins

There is a special case of reconcile, named **last-write-wins** (lww), where we
also want to reduce all values to a single one, but that value *must* be already
present in the DVVSet. Thus, we let the winning value stay in the same Dot as
before.  This function named `lww` has the same parameters as `reconcile`, but
the function it receives is a **less or equal** [ordering function][ord fun].
Thus, this `Fun(A,B)` returns `true` if A compares less than or equal to B,
`false` otherwise. Using that, we keep the greatest value (*note*: we
preemptively discard values besides the first Dot in each triplet).

Here is an (Erlang) example of using `lww` in a DVVSet with values types
`{Value, Timestamp}`:

```Erlang
    Fun = fun ({_,TS1}, {_,TS2}) -> TS1 =< TS2 end,
    DVVSet = {[{a,4,[{5, 1002345}, {7, 1002340}]}, {b,1,[{4, 1001340}]}], [{2, 1001140}]},
    Res = dvvset:lww(Fun, DVVSet),
    {[{a,4,[{5, 1002345}]}, {b,1,[]}], []} = Res.
```

We define a *less or equal* function for our type of values and use it in `lww`.
It returns a DVVSet with the same causal information, but only with the
*greatest* value remaining. Naturally, in this case it's {5, 1002345}, which has
the highest timestamp. Notice how the *winning* value stays in its original
triplet instead of going to the AL, unlike `reconcile`.


#### Reading

![Dotted Version Vector Set in a GET][DVVSet get]

When a client wants to read a key/value, we extract the *global* causal
information (a VV) from DVVSet using a function called `join`. Then, we
extract all values using the function `values`. The VV should be treated as an
opaque object that should be returned in a subsequent write. In the example,
`join` gives the VV `(A,3)` and `values` gives the list of values `[v2,v3]`.


#### Writing

![Dotted Version Vector Set in a PUT][DVVSet put]

When a client wants to write to a key/value, he gives a value and a VV. We first
create a new DVVSet to represent the new write, using `new`. It returns a DVVSet
with the same causal information as the VV and the new value in the AL. Then, we
call a function `update` on that new DVVSet and the server's DVVSet. It
synchronizes both, discarding old values. In this case, *v1* is outdated because
the client VV already knows (A,1), therefore we discard it. After this, we
advance the causal information in DVVSet and insert a new Dot to reflect the new
event. In the example, we advance the VV from `(A,2)` to `(A,3)` and create a
Dot for *v3*.


## Real World with Riak

We implemented DVVSet in our fork of [Basho's][riak site] [Riak][riak github]
NoSQL database, as an alternative to their VV implementation, as a proof of
concept.

The Riak version using VV is
[here](https://github.com/ricardobcl/riak_kv/tree/master), and the DVVset is
[here](https://github.com/ricardobcl/riak_kv/tree/dvvset).
Or see a diff [here](https://github.com/basho/riak_kv/pull/572/files).

Lets take a look at 2 different scenarios, where we can clearly see real world
advantages of DVVSet:

* **Scenario 1**
    1. Client C1 writes, then reads;
    2. Meanwhile, another client writes a new value (without causal information);
    3. Repeat 1 and 2.

    Version Vector:
![VV with conflicts #4][VV 4]

    Dotted Version Vector Set:
![Dotted Version Vector Set #4][DVVSet 2]

* **Scenario 2**
    1. Client A writes, then reads;
    2. Next, client B writes, then reads;
    3. Repeat 1 and 2.

    Version Vector:
![VV with conflicts #5][VV 5]

    Dotted Version Vector Set:
![Dotted Version Vector Set #5][DVVSet 3]

These are two patterns where traditional VV degenerates badly, while DVVSet
behaves well. Lets run these scenarios for some time, writing to real Riak
nodes:

```Erlang
$ erlc sib.erl; erl sib -pa ebin deps/*/ebin
Erlang R15B02 (erts-5.9.2) [source] [64-bit] [smp:4:4] [async-threads:0] [hipe]
[kernel-poll:false] [dtrace]

Eshell V5.9.2  (abort with ^G)

1> %% Riak with Version Vectors ; Scenario 1
1> sib:run1(101).
Siblings: 101
Values: v79 v10 v18 v34 v61 v68 v45 v1 v25 v30 v19 v55 v63 v29 v53 v89 v90 v49
v14 v67 v36 v65 v31 v27 v91 v72 v2 v86 v99 v11 v21 v20 v85 v22 v71 v3 v26 v7 v59
v93 v57 v40 v17 v9 v77 v4 v41 v62 v80 v33 v43 v54 v76 v37 v98 v92 v15 v56 v16
v66 v60 v46 v48 v52 v5 v13 v44 v8 v32 v101 v70 v69 v97 v28 v73 v50 v83 v6 v42
v51 v75 v81 v74 v100 v64 v12 v88 v94 v78 v47 v82 v95 v96 v23 v35 v39 v87 v24 v58
v38 v84

2> %% Riak with Version Vectors ; Scenario 2
2> sib:run2(101).
Siblings: 101
Values: v32 v75 v49 v19 v83 v50 v72 v1 v33 v22 v14 v26 v92 v64 v9 v86 v37 v85
v16 v17 v99 v43 v24 v47 v56 v11 v87 v52 v67 v94 v35 v81 v95 v6 v28 v27 v8 v20
v10 v100 v53 v97 v13 v62 v38 v93 v55 v34 v31 v74 v5 v3 v54 v25 v59 v84 v12 v76
v23 v42 v36 v39 v58 v45 v73 v78 v96 v66 v51 v48 v41 v80 v71 v101 v79 v57 v30 v7
v68 v77 v82 v65 v15 v89 v63 v40 v18 v91 v60 v21 v29 v70 v46 v98 v4 v2 v69 v90
v88 v61 v44


3> %% Riak with DVVSet ; Scenario 1
3> sib:run1(101).
Siblings: 2
Values: v101 v100

4> %% Riak with DVVSet ; Scenario 2
4> sib:run2(101).
Siblings: 2
Values: v101 v100
```

As we can see, both scenarios have similar results: with VV you have an
exploding number of siblings in your Riak database; with DVVSet you have always
2 or 3 siblings.

The test code can be found [here](https://gist.github.com/ricardobcl/4992839).


## How to Use

The major use case that DVVSet targets is a client-server system over a
distributed database. So here are the common uses of DVVSet to implement in that
case:

1. **A client writes a new value**

    ```Erlang
        %% create a new DVVSet for the new value V
        NewDVVSet = dvvset:new(V),
        %% update the causal history of DVVSet using the server identifier
        DVVSet = dvvset:update(NewDVVSet, ServerID),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```

2. **A client writes an updated value and an opaque (unaltered) version vector
(obtained from a previous read on this key)**

    ```Erlang
        %% create a new DVVSet for the new value V, using the client's context
        NewDVVSet = dvvset:new(Context, V),
        %% update the new DVVSet with the local server DVVSet and the server ID
        DVVSet = dvvset:update(NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet, ServerID),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```

3. **A client reads a value**

    ```Erlang
        %% synchronize from different server DVVSet
        DVVSet = dvvset:sync(ListOfDVVSet),
        %% get the value(s)
        Val = dvvset:values(DVVSet),
        %% get the causal information (version vector)
        VV = dvvset:join(DVVSet),
        %% return both to client...
    ```

4. **A replica receives a DVVSet from the coordinator to (synchronize and) store
locally**

    ```Erlang
        %% synchronize the new DVVSet with the local DVVSet
        DVVSet = dvvset:sync([NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet]),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```

5. **A replica receives a DVVSet from another replica to synchronize for anti-
entropy (keeps replicas up-to-date)**

    ```Erlang
        %% test if the local DVVSet is causally newer than the remote DVVSet
        case dvvset:less(NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet) of
            %% we already have the newest DVVSet so do nothing
            true  -> do_nothing;
            %% reconcile both and write locally the resulting DVVSet
            false -> DVVSet = dvvset:sync([NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet]),
                     %% store DVVSet...
        end.
    ```

6. **A client writes a new value V with the *last-write-wins* policy**

    ```Erlang
        %% create a new DVVSet for the new value, using the client's context
        NewDVVSet = dvvset:new(Context, V),
        %% update the new DVVSet with the local server DVVSet and the server ID
        UpdDVVSet = dvvset:update(NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet, ServerID),
        %% preserve the causal information of UpdDVVSet, but keep only 1 value 
        %% according to the ordering function F
        DVVSet = dvvset:lww(F, UpdDVVSet),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```
    We could do only `DVVSet = dvvset:new(V)` and write DVVSet immediately,
    saving the cost of a local read, but generally its safer to preserve causal
    information, especially if the *lww* policy can be turned on and off per
    request or changed during a key lifetime;


## DVVSets Variations

### Removing old entries

If we *really* want to bound the number of entries of a dvvset, we can use the
function `prune`, which takes a dvvset and the *maximum number of entries (MAX)*
we want to have. If the dvvset exceeds MAX, we throw away the oldest entry that
has no values (if there isn't any, don't do anything). We can know the oldest
entry because we keep a *logical time (LT)* for each one. LT provides everything
we wanted with realtime timestamps, but with 2 advantages: there is no need to
get / calculate the realtime for every update, and with logical time, we are
immune to system clock skews.

This LT is updated in 3 situations:

* The node **serving a PUT** executes `update`, we calculate the maximum LT for
all entries, add 1 and associate it to the entry of that node's ID;
* A node receives a **replicated PUT** to store, so it syncs it with the local
object and calls the function `update_time` with its node ID, before saving; it
updates the entry of that node ID with the maximum LT of the dvvset (only if its
node ID is present);
* A node receives a PUT to **synchronize locally** (e.g anti-entropy). If the
remote object is not obsolete, use the `update_time` as before and save locally.
Thus, we  only update the LT if we were already going to save a new version of
that object.

The `update_time` copies the maximum LT in the dvvset to the entry with the ID
that was passed. Nodes IDs that were retired (e.g. a node crashed)
will never update their LT again. On the other hand, every node that serves
PUTs and also saves new versions for that object, will have an increasing LT.

Over time the oldest entries according to LT, would the ones that didn't
recently save new versions for this key. Thus, when pruning, we should remove
this entries first, since they are from the least participative nodes (or
retired nodes).

#### Usage

If you want to use this version of DVVSet, then use the file
[dvvset_prune][dvvset prune] instead of [dvvset][dvvset original]. Then, add two function to
your code:

1. Call `prune` with MAX after calling `update` in the coordinating node.
    
    ```Erlang
        %% create a new DVVSet for the new value V, using the client's context
        NewDVVSet = dvvset:new(Context, V),
        %% update the new DVVSet with the local server DVVSet and the server ID
        DVVSet0 = dvvset:update(NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet, ServerID),
        %% call prune with MAX = 5
        DVVSet1 = dvvset:prune(DVVSet0, 5),
        %% store DVVSet1...
    ```

2. When locally updating / synchronizing a new version (for a replicated PUT, or
anti-entropy), call `update_time` with the local node ID after calling `sync`.

    ```Erlang
        %% synchronize the new DVVSet with the local DVVSet
        DVVSet0 = dvvset:sync([NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet]),
        %% call update_time to flag this node as "alive"
        DVVSet1 = dvvset:update_time(DVVSet0, ServerID),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```

### Consecutive and concurrent writes

A write can acknowledge to the client if it succeeded. It can also return the
causal information for that key (context), without the values/siblings, which
avoids the need to read from the system to do a new write. This returned context
after a successful put has one limitation: if the server ends up with siblings
after a write, the returned context cannot be used to do new writes, since it
represents siblings the client did not read or knows their values. We have to
read those siblings, otherwise we would overwrite them, causing information loss
for other clients.

The point here is that the context returned from a put should represent the
causal information known by that write, including the new value, and not contain
causal information about siblings created concurrently from others clients.

We modified DVVSets to support consecutive and concurrent writes, at the expense
of losing some of the compactness in the original DVVSets. The file
[dvvset\_put\_ack][dvvset ack put] implements this version, which we call
*DVVSetAck* below, for brevity.

The main difference between them is that DVVSetAck supports non-contiguous
causal information. Thus, we can now acknowledge a write to the client with the
same context provided for that operation, plus the a new single dot that
represents the new value/sibling written. With this, multiple clients can do
consecutive writes without being forced to read, if siblings were generated from
other sources. Clients now don't even have to check if there are siblings before
writing again, since we don't return contexts after a put that represent and
overwrite siblings which this client does not know about.

Each entry of the DVVSetAck is a 4-tuple `(id, base, dots, values)`. The `base`
represents the largest contiguous causal events without values, beginning at 0.
The `dots` are all the individual causal events without values, that aren't
contiguous with the `base`. Finally, `values` are the single events (dots) with
values, represented by tuples `(dot, value)`.


#### Example

(Unlike previous illustrations, lets make responses to client requests explicit.)

With DVVSet:
![DVVSet Ack][DVVSet Ack]

With DVVSetAck:
![DVVSetAck put][DVVSetAck Put]

With DVVSets (or VV), when client C2 wants to write *v3* it can't do it
immediately, because the acknowledgment from writing *v2* tells that there are
siblings, thus writing *v3* with that context would overwrite them (in this case
*v1*). Thus, C2 must read that key to obtain all the siblings and their
respective context, resolve them and maybe write *v3* (the client may want to
write another value, after resolving the conflicts, which were unknown when the
intention was to write *v3*). **It forces the client to resolve conflicts before
being able to write again!**

With our modification to DVVSets, we can write multiple times without doing
reading or resolving conflicts, as we can see from the second put by client C2,
where we overwrite *v2* without reading or losing the sibling *v1*.

#### Usage

We have a new function `event` that is used exactly as `update`, but returns a
DVVSet containing only the context and the new dot for the value. Now we can
call `join` to extract the causal information and return that as acknowledgment
to the client. Finally, we call `sync` to synchronize with the local DVVSet.

The function `update` still exists and can be used as before. All it does is
encapsulate `event` and `sync` in one function.

1. **A client writes a new value**

    ```Erlang
        %% create a new DVVSet for the new value V
        NewDVVSet = dvvset:new(V),
        %% update the causal history of DVVSet using the server identifier
        Dot = dvvset:event(NewDVVSet, ServerID),
        AckContext = dvvset:join(Dot),
        %% acknowledge the write with the context AckContext
        DVVSet = dvvset:sync([LocalDVVSet, Dot]),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```

2. **A client writes an updated value and an opaque (unaltered) version vector
(obtained from a previous read on this key or from a put's ack)**

    ```Erlang
        %% create a new DVVSet for the new value V, using the client's context
        NewDVVSet = dvvset:new(Context, V),
        %% create a new DVVSet with a new Dot for the new value
        %% the result is only the previous context plus a new dot
        Dot = dvvset:event(NewDVVSet, LocalDVVSet, ServerID),
        AckContext = dvvset:join(Dot),
        %% acknowledge the write with the context AckContext
        DVVSet = dvvset:sync([LocalDVVSet, Dot]),
        %% store DVVSet...
    ```

[dvvset original]: https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors/blob/master/dvvset.erl
[dvvset prune]: https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors/blob/master/dvvset_prune.erl
[dvvset ack put]: https://github.com/ricardobcl/Dotted-Version-Vectors/blob/master/dvvset_put_ack.erl
[paper dvv]: http://gsd.di.uminho.pt/members/vff/dotted-version-vectors-2012.pdf
[paper crdt]: http://hal.inria.fr/docs/00/61/73/41/PDF/RR-7687.pdf
[blog VV are not VC]: http://haslab.wordpress.com/2011/07/08/version-vectors-are-not-vector-clocks
[VV 1]: images/VV1.png
[VV 2]: images/VV2.png
[VV 3]: images/VV3.png
[VV 4]: images/VV4.png
[VV 5]: images/VV5.png
[DVV]: images/DVV.png
[DVVSet 1]: images/DVVSet1.png
[DVVSet 2]: images/DVVSet2.png
[DVVSet 3]: images/DVVSet3.png
[Dot 1]: images/Dot1.png
[Dot 2]: images/Dot2.png
[Dot 3]: images/Dot3.png
[Dot 4]: images/Dot4.png
[DVVSet put]: images/PUT.png
[DVVSet get]: images/GET.png
[DVVSet Ack]: images/DVVsetPUTACK.png
[DVVSetAck Put]: images/DVVSetACK.png
[ord fun]: http://www.erlang.org/doc/man/lists.html#ordering_function
[riak site]: http://basho.com/
[riak github]: https://github.com/basho/riak
